Welcome you to the audio
production session at WWDC 2004.
My name is Phil Jackson,
I'm the audio product
specialist for Apple computers.
And during this presentation what
I'm going to do is show you how
we can use Logic Pro 6 for audio
music production on the Macintosh.
It's really,
this is something I really love
to do and I really love to show
people how this how this works.
Now,
Before I actually start the presentation,
I kind of got to get a gist or a feel
of what type of people are in here,
besides the people that are yawning.
Any musicians in the house?
Wow, excellent.
Any non-musicians in the house?
Like drummers?
Think people like that?
Okay.
And how many video people do we have?
Wow, so we've got a whole selection.
I'm assuming that you've
been enjoying the show,
and that's fantastic.
Now, a friend of mine, Joseph Linasky,
he did his presentation earlier,
and he said that he allowed some question
and answering during the presentation.
I, on the other hand, don't allow that.
So, we may do that.
We may wait until the end.
So, what I want to try and do is to
help you guys understand exactly
what Logic Pro 6 is all about.
I want to take a step back and show
you the way that maybe making music
has been done for the last few years.
Now, music production has changed
considerably over the last 10 years,
thanks to the computers.
The ability to take a simple melody or
chord progression and just go with that,
and shape it,
and produce that into a finished song.
It's just really, really incredible.
And slowly,
the computer has started to replace
some of those larger devices
within the recording studio,
and has really allowed
a lot more flexibility.
So that's what I want to start with.
I wanted to sort of talk to
you about how music used to
be recorded in the old days.
Not so much in the old days,
maybe a little while ago,
but... We start off with
musical instruments,
and we need musical
instruments to create music,
to make sound, to actually record music.
And instruments can be anything
from acoustic instruments,
such as a piano, acoustic guitar,
or an upright bass,
to an electronic instrument
or an orchestral instrument,
maybe like an electric
guitar and electric bass,
or an organ or a synthesizer.
Now inherently,
when you're in the recording studio and
you want to make a nice large project,
that requires a lot of work.
That requires arranging and
organizing multiple musicians
and multiple instruments,
and paying them and getting them into
one room where we can actually go ahead
and experiment with textures and sounds
that are beyond what a particular
band have within their players.
And so that's been quite expensive.
And so, some musical instruments
is definitely something the
computer has helped us with.
It has given us much more of a
palette of tools to work with.
So that's the musical aspect,
the musical instrument aspect of it.
The next one, microphones.
Now we need microphones in the
recording studio to help us get down
the sound of these acoustic instruments.
We've got an acoustic guitar,
we need to mic it up.
That microphone gets plugged
into a mixing console,
and then straight on to
the multi-track recorder.
So let's talk about mixing consoles.
Now the mixing console is inherently
there to pre-amplify the microphones or
the line instruments that we plug in.
It allows us to boost that signal,
add some equalization,
and then that will often go off and be
recorded on the multi-track recorder.
Now mixing consoles range in size.
They can go from anywhere from
a four-channel mixing device
all the way up to something
like a 96-input SSL like that,
which could essentially
cost a million dollars plus.
Now the other nice thing about
the mixing console is it allows
us to take all of the tracks
coming back from the multi-track
so that we can listen to playback.
So we can mix and we can balance out that
and we can listen to the arrangement and
see exactly which musician's parts need
to be replaced with real musician parts.
So essentially that's the
idea of the mixing console.
And as I said, they can be very,
very expensive.
And a lot of them, like the SSL,
on Each of their channels,
they'll have a dynamic section
like a noise gate and a compressor.
And they'll usually have a center
master section that allows you
total control over the volume
of your speakers in the studio.
So, if I can get a new battery for this,
this would be great.
There we go.
Multi-track recorders.
Now, after everything's gone
through the mixing console,
it's going to go on to
the multi-track recorder.
A multi-track recorder is
a little bit like the tape
player that you have at home.
I don't have any tape
players at home anymore,
but use your imagination.
One exception is a lot bigger, of course,
and a lot more expensive.
But the thing about a multi-track,
it allows every instrument
to have its own track.
It allows us to stack and layer different
instruments onto the multi-tape recorder.
Excuse me.
Oh, thank you.
I thought he was coming up to take over.
I was going to say,
I don't think I was sucking that bad.
Oh, okay.
So anyway, I was talking about the
multi-track recorder.
It allows you to layer up
track after track after track,
in essence making one
vocalist sound like many.
Now, multi-track recorders come
in various different sizes.
They can come in a 4-track, 8-track,
16-track, 24-track.
And sometimes when we need really,
really big sessions,
what we can do is we can synchronize
these multi-tracks together.
They can be synced or slaved together.
Thank you.
Let's have a look at that again.
They can be synced or slaved
together to double the track count.
And in the early part of the 90s,
when digital multi-tracks first
started appearing on the market,
we then had single machines
that could get as high as 48
tracks per single machine.
So that's a multi-track recorder.
Now,
when you've done all of your recording
and everything's sounding good,
we usually go into what
we call the mixing stage,
and this allows us to
take effects processors.
And effects processors can run
the gamut of different types.
They can range from subtle
things to things that radically
change the way something sounds.
The way something sounds
when it's recorded,
or the way something sounds
before it actually gets recorded.
It really doesn't matter.
But these things can range from
simple things such as an equalizer,
high, mid frequencies, low, mid, low end,
to compressors and noise gates,
to modulation effects like chorusing,
flanging, and phasing,
to echo systems and delays,
all the way up to something
maybe like a room simulator,
a reverb unit,
which can place an instrument or a
person's voice in any type of room.
It could be a concert hall,
it could be a church,
it could be a parking garage,
it could even be a hallway.
It could be a mall like this one.
And so that's the effects processors.
Now the nice thing is all of this
stuff that we've just looked at,
the multitrack recorder,
the mixing console,
the effects processors,
with the exception of the microphone,
have all been rolled into one
production system called Logic Audio.
And what we can do is we can go through
and look at some of the comparisons now.
Logic Pro 6 really gives you
total integration in one package.
And this has allowed
musicians and drummers,
and producers,
to freely experiment more with
the music that they're recording.
In fact,
the whole workflow of recording music has
somewhat changed because of computers,
because we can now do
things while we're doing,
while we're tracking,
we can add EQ and we can add effects,
rather than waiting to the
entire end of the process,
and just, "Okay, right,
we're finished recording,
let's send it off to an overly
expensive guy to mix." So,
let's take a look at it.
Logic Pro 6 as a multitrack
recorder for audio.
Now, Logic is only limited by the
audio hardware that you're using.
So, for example,
if you've got four inputs
on your audio hardware,
that's the maximum amount of tracks
that you can record at any one time.
If you have 16 inputs,
that's the maximum amount of tracks
you can record at any one time.
However,
Logic Pro 6 can play back up to 256
tracks of digital audio at any one time.
And that's with sample rates
all the way up to 192 kilohertz,
at 24-bit, pristine sound.
It also, like I say,
sample rates up to 192,
and always sample accurate playback.
The difference between Logic and
a regular multitrack is,
there's a little picture
here of the arrange window,
is that Logic is a multitrack
recorder for audio,
but it's also a multitrack
recorder for MIDI.
And for those of you who
are not familiar with MIDI,
MIDI stands for Musical Instrument
Digital Interface,
and it's just a protocol
that allows synthesizers,
let's say you've got a synthesizer
over here and one over here,
they allow them to talk and communicate.
And inherently,
that allows the computer to
communicate with an external keyboard.
So, for example,
when you're recording a MIDI keyboard,
we refer to this as sequencing, actually.
So recording audio, multitracking,
recording MIDI, kind of sequencing,
one of the same thing,
but we don't actually
record an audio signal,
we record MIDI data.
That MIDI data is played back
in real time out to the device,
which tells the device exactly which
notes and which chords to play.
And of course,
Logic offers non-destructive recording,
which is something that you
don't have in the analog world.
If you accidentally hit record
over the last tail end of an
amazing vocal performance,
you bet your bottom dollar
that it will be gone for good,
and also can be very expensive.
So, Logic Pro 6 has an
integrated mixing console.
Logic Pro 6 has a beautiful
Every single channel that
can be recorded in it,
every single channel that
can be recorded in Logic,
or played back, has its own mute button,
its own solo button for
isolating it from the mix,
has a volume faders, and of course,
it has level meters.
We also have many different
types of channel strips.
We have audio channels,
we have auxiliary channels,
we have buses, we have input channels,
we have output channels,
just like in the analog world.
Logic can operate every channel,
either mono, stereo,
or incomplete surround.
Anyone out there mixing
music for surround,
Logic Pro 6 is definitely the way to go.
It has flexible routing capabilities
and flexible DSP inserts.
In fact, let me just stray one second.
Thanks to the sheer power
of the G5 and the Macintosh,
it's allowed Logic Pro 6 to
create a suite of unbelievable
virtual instruments that can be
played like any other synthesizer,
and they range from simple
sampled instruments,
sampler, or sampled instruments,
to instruments that are
created via synthesis,
and other instruments that are
created via physical modeling.
And they really allow the single
musician like myself or you to
have many more textures and tones
available to you for when you're
actually writing and arranging music.
And the nice thing about those
instruments is they live on
what we call audio instrument
channels right here in the mixer,
and they have their own set of volume,
mutes, solos, panning,
and DSP inserts for complete and total
integration into the production process.
So that's fantastic.
And of course,
everything on the integrated
mixing console is fully,
fully automated.
And we, just for my friend over there,
Logic's got silky smooth EQ,
I can tell you that.
It's phenomenal.
So what about Logic Pro 6 as
a multi-effects processor?
And there is the EQ right at the top.
There are eight bands of silky smooth EQ.
As a multi-effects processor,
Logic comes with over 50
amazing sounding effects.
Now these particular effects, again,
range the gamut from subtle to radical.
So subtle being things like EQs,
compression, multiband compression,
and more radical being things
like spectral gates and phasing,
fast modulation, echo, room simulation.
We have Space Designer,
which is the plug-in right down here.
This is a convolution reverb
that's capable of taking any
instrument into any environment.
It could be a room like this,
it could be a church,
it could be for use in post-production
for video because you might have some
dialogue that's going on inside of,
say, a Volkswagen Beetle.
And you need that voice to sound
like it's inside of a Beetle.
No good shooting a scene inside of a
Beetle and having it sound like the
guys are in a big parking garage.
So Space Designerigner allows
you to place any signal in
any type of environment.
Now built right into the
Core OS of the Mac is the
Audio Unit Standard for plug-ins.
And what this has allowed Logic to do,
because it supports it,
it's allowed all of these third-party
people like yourselves to create
amazing and innovative plug-ins that
can immediately be integrated right
alongside Logic's own plug-ins for even
more of a wide variety of sounds and DSP.
So basically Logic Pro 6 is probably
one of the most flexible music
production systems available.
And although we've just seen
some of the analog counterparts,
the multi-tracks and the mixes,
and we've made those
comparisons to Logic,
there are many other aspects
of Logic which make it truly a
wonderful and inviting program to
use for creating any type of music.
And it could be just writing a
song at home in your home studio,
it could be writing a
number one hit record,
it could be scoring music
for film and for television.
So Logic Pro 6,
we talked a little bit about the
instruments and let me show you them.
There are nine of these
instruments in all,
all packed into one
complete production system.
And as I said before,
the sample-based instruments at the top,
we have the EXS24, it's a 24-bit sampler.
It can load up a variety of instruments.
It can load up a variety of
different sound libraries.
So you pretty much have access to
thousands upon thousands of sounds,
everything from a piano to an oboe,
anything.
We also have plug-ins that
create their sound via synthesis.
The ES1,
the single oscillator synthesizer,
or the ES2, which is really,
it's a real badass.
It really is, and it's three oscillators,
just sounds amazing.
But we also have modeled instruments,
and modeled instruments
are a beautiful thing,
and finally, for the first time,
allow us to faithfully recreate some
of the classic instruments that we
have spent years and years listening
every day on records and CDs.
At the top we have the EVB3,
which faithfully recreates
the Hammond organ.
The EVD6, which models and recreates
the classic Hohner D6 clavinet
that was made famous by,
I don't know, just called, Stevie,
Stevie Wonder.
And then down here we have the EVP-8.
Which faithfully recreates all
of the classic pianos of the 70s.
So there are the virtual instruments.
Logic also has integrated editing,
because of course once you start
the production process and you
start recording MIDI and audio,
you need something to edit them with.
So Logic has a wonderful built-in event
list editor that lets you edit all
of your controller data and your note
data via a numerical style editing.
That's the event list.
Then we have the matrix editor,
which gives you a sort of,
more of a piano roll look.
This is where you can have a vertical
keyboard here that represents each
of the notes on a horizontal line.
And you can see where the note starts
and you can see how long the note is.
You can even see how hard
that note or chord was pressed
by referring to the colours,
red being the loudest,
blue being the quietest.
We also have the hyper editor and we
also have an integrated score editor.
Now I do want to say this
about the score part of it,
is it's not really just a score editor.
Logic is a full-on score editor.
It's a full-on page
layout scoring program,
which can be used either
with the sequencer or
independently of the sequencer.
So for example,
I could put down a little melody in
C and listen to that melody in C,
yet I can have the score show
me what it might look like
scored for a trumpet in A flat.
Those guys playing brass,
they always like to blow their own horn.
But anyway,
so what we're looking at here is
just an example of some printing out.
This is using the jazz font.
On this particular example, City Nights.
So full-on scoring.
And this is great for arrangers and for
musicians that are composing music and
then needing to take printed notation out
to a sound stage where you may record the
final piece of music with an orchestra.
And of course you would be
recording it directly to Logic.
Logic Pro 6 is a professional
desktop and portable solution.
The G5, absolutely amazing,
up to dual 2.5 GHz,
will give you enough power for even
the largest large scale production.
And of course with the PowerBook,
that's going to give you the
portability and the mobility that
you need to take a project out into
the field and just start recording.
You can finally take your entire
recording studio to the client.
Essentially that alleviates
so much equipment.
I mean,
I remember reading something about the
Beatles when they wanted to actually
take the tape machine out of the tape
machine room and take it down the
hallway to move it into the studio room.
It took them like five days to get
permission to move that big tape player,
but now we can just take our power book
and we can be recording it any place.
So Logic truly is an all-in-one
solution that offers convenience,
it offers economic values,
it's a lot cheaper, more portable,
and of course much more creative
control over everything.
So at this particular point,
what I'm going to do is I'm going to
get on the computer and just give you an
idea of exactly what I'm talking about.
Is that alright?
Don't all jump and say yes at once,
will you?
Alright,
let's take a look at what we've got.
So, let's switch the screen.
I've got a lot of equipment up here,
so... So what we'll do is we'll
start with a brief overview
of the main arrangement,
and this is the main
arranged window within Logic,
and this is where you do
all of your sequencing and
you do all of your editing.
You can think of this
like your virtual canvas,
for example.
So, over here on the left-hand side,
this is our track list, and as I said,
when we're talking
about multi-track logic,
it's more than just audio.
It is audio, it is virtual instruments,
there are MIDI tracks.
So, this is your track list right here,
and that track list can be
freely configured by you,
the user, depending on the type of
tracks that you want to record
at any one particular time.
Each track can be given a track name.
We've got an icon, a mute,
protect button,
and a track number running at the side.
On the left over here are
what we call the parameters.
They help you as you're
actually creating your music.
At the top where it says MIDI through,
we have playback parameters,
and I'll talk a little bit about
playback parameters in a little while.
They're primarily used for editing,
and we are, I'm not showing it right now,
but we have a toolbox,
which usually lives in the parameters,
and we have instrument parameters,
and then we have a channel strip,
which is essentially the
one channel strip from the
particularly selected track.
So, for example, the bass is selected,
and that's showing the single
channel from the virtual mixer.
Those parameters can be hidden.
At the top we have a transport control,
which has got our tempo
and our time signature,
and then along the top
we have our timeline,
and you can see the line right there.
That is the SPL,
or the song position line.
That moves from left to right
and indicates the current
position of our arrangement.
And you can see the white bar at the top,
that's what we call the cycle beam,
and that allows us to just cycle
around a particular section.
If I'm working on something
over and over again,
I can go over and simply change
how many bars I'm cycling around.
The main body of the arrangement here,
this is really like your virtual canvas,
and you can see that
we have some objects,
because Logic is an
object oriented sequencer.
It's essentially you move objects around,
you manipulate these objects,
and these are what the objects look like,
and they can be of different varieties.
So, for example, right there we have the
guitar left and right.
That's what we call an audio region.
That's an audio file
that's been recorded,
and it can be identified because it
has a waveform overview over the top.
The difference between an
audio region and a MIDI region,
sometimes referred to as an object,
we do sometimes refer
to these as objects,
is that MIDI data,
and they have a notation overview.
Again,
that helps to identify the difference
between a MIDI track and an audio track.
So let me just give you an example.
I'm just zooming in right
here on my lead vocal track,
and I'll just play this a little
bit just to give you an idea.
Some things are missing.
In fact, what I'm going to do is I'm
just going to take all of that
and we'll just delete those.
So let's just take a listen
to what we've got here.
We have a little vocal track.
[Transcript missing]
So, this song is somewhat unfinished.
It's got some vocals,
it's got some guitar and some bass,
but there are certain things
that I want to sort of add to it.
I might want to add some drums,
I might want to add some bass,
and things like that.
So, what I want to first do is
introduce you to those wonderful
instruments that we talked about.
So,
the first one I'm going to talk about,
I'm not going to actually use this one,
but this is called the EVB-3.
And this emulates the classic Hammond.
Let's see if we can get a
bit more volume out of that.
And let me just make sure, yeah.
So how many people are actually
familiar with the Hammond organ?
Yeah, I mean,
really it's one of the hardest
instruments to recreate,
especially the Leslie speaker.
So for example, here's-- let's kick
the Leslie speaker on.
Now this thing has got
some amazing parameters.
It's got all of the classic
parameters that you'll find on the B3,
including draw bars, so for example
adjustments to our drawbars.
We have all of the parameters for
crafting this instrument from a brand
new Hammond organ that just came
out of the factory way back in 1950
to one that's been around the world
and has been completely thrashed
upon night after night after night.
The tubes are old, the whole workings of
the machine are old.
And we have plenty of parameters down
here like the volume of the click,
how much drawbar leakage
we can hear in the sound.
And all of that serves to
age the B3 in many ways.
And this is a modelled instrument.
So for example, we can come up here and
we can turn the growl on.
We've got three types of
distortion because sometimes the
Hammond was a classic for growl.
Fantastic.
Now the other nice thing is the reverb.
One thing that made the Hammond
so nice is the reverb unit
would go through the Leslie.
And for those of you who
don't know what a Leslie is,
it's a spinning speaker.
It's essentially two spinning speakers.
It's got a bass pointing down with a
drum that revolves in one direction,
and then it's got a tweeter
at the top with a horn that
revolves in the other direction.
And if I crank the reverb up,
we can hear that.
We can just hear that
going through the Leslie.
So faithfully recreates what
is inherently one of the most
magical instruments of all time.
And of course we can simply
call up different presets.
Music
All the way up to really
thin sounding DAWs.
So, getting back to what I was saying
in the beginning about instruments,
about having to organize different
musicians and different instruments
all together in one room to
create different arrangements.
Again, you know, you've got Logic here,
and you go, I want a Hammond.
No problem.
Call it up, and there it is,
immediately ready.
And it actually weighs a
lot less than the original.
So, what else do we have?
Well, here's one of my favorites.
This is the EVP-88.
This is actually one of our first
instruments that eMagic created.
And it's actually one of
the more simple plug-ins.
Essentially, let's,
what I'm going to do here is I'm just
going to call up a default patch,
and just going to bring up
the volume a little bit.
So, we essentially have models
of different types of pianos,
and for those of you familiar
with the electric piano,
we have a suitcase piano.
My sustain pedal's not working.
It's back to front, give me one second.
See,
let me just zip around this software,
there we go, click some ports, polarity,
let me just put that back to normal,
there we go.
So, that's a suitcase piano.
We can turn this big knob here and we
can have a model of a suitcase version 2,
or the classic bright suitcase,
or the Fender Road Stage 1 piano.
Can you hear that?
Because I can't hear it.
You know what I'm saying?
It's about music.
It's about sending these
people out of here deaf.
Okay, so that is the classic Stage 1.
Of course there was a Stage Mark 2,
which was just slightly different.
Had a sort of bit more
metallic feel to it,
and we even have a
classic Wurlitzer 200A,
which is just a phenomenal sounding.
Now he's singing it,
you know what I mean?
You got some pliers?
Where are we John?
Um...
So anyway, that's the classic Wurlitzer.
Now, the nice thing about this,
because it is modeled,
we have some model parameters
like the decay and the release.
So for example,
with the classic suitcase,
I can change the release,
I can bring that down,
I can bring the decay up.
It sounds exactly the same.
Let's bring it down a bit.
So it's a very short
and staccato sound now.
We also have the ability
to change the the tines,
or the volume of the tines,
or the bell as we call it.
And also the damper.
For those of you who don't know the
intricate workings of an electric piano,
they have a damper that
when you let go of the keys,
it comes down and rests.
And sometimes you can
actually hear that damper,
if I crank it right up, we can...
It's hard for you to hear, but it's just,
again it adds to the
realistic characteristics of
this particular instrument.
And we have a stereo intensity,
we have a stretch parameter,
so if you were to play this,
because this is a model,
unlike a sampled instrument,
so for example, there are no funny,
strange envelopes or loop points to get
in the way of what I call the pure tone.
So for example,
if I play an octave down low,
We essentially have a pure tone.
There's nothing cross-fading
or destroying that tone like we
would hear if it was sampled.
And because it is so pure,
if we were to play this in
conjunction with an acoustic piano,
acoustic piano is manually
tuned by a human ear,
so we have a stretch function which
allows us just to slightly vary it so
that it will sit more pleasantly within
the confines of a grand acoustic piano.
It has got an EQ,
it's got a beautiful drive,
it has an amazing phaser.
Check this out,
we'll just bring up the rate
and the color just a little bit.
and it's also got a beautiful tremolo.
Let me just go through here
and let's bring that down and
let's bring up the tremolo.
This is a stage mark
one with the tremolo.
So if we wanted to take this,
for example,
I'm just going to call up a simple patch.
Yeah, I'll just call up this patch.
And what I'm going to do is,
I'm just going to close
this for a second.
I'm going to come up here to my song.
This is my verse.
So I'm just going to
zoom out a little bit.
Let's take off the
automation of this track.
And, let's say I want to actually just
go ahead and record a little,
just a simple line.
Nothing extravagant.
We're just going to record.
Love is so good.
If I make a mistake
I can stop and go again.
I can actually come
down just a little bit.
And you can see once I stop recording,
as bad as that performance was,
it gives me a MIDI sequence right
there in the arrange window,
which I can zoom in,
and I can come over here and
I can quantize that to correct
those mistakes that I made,
and do some other editing to it.
So I'll leave that for now.
Let me show you another instrument,
the EVD-6,
yet another modeled instrument.
Now the modeling of this particular
instrument is done using a string.
It kind of models the characteristics
of a stringed instrument,
in this case, a clavinet.
So for example, it can sound like this.
Or we could change that to
sound a little bit more like,
say, a guitar.
Makes me feel like singing
a Michael Bolton song.
Yes, who needs that?
We can add some tape delay over here.
We can see that we were talking about
the channel strip in Logic before.
You can see that the
EBD 6 is right down here.
That is the actual instrument,
and then up here I have
some effect slots,
so I can add a delay to that.
And also some modulation to
really enhance that sound.
And we can also mute that,
and we can come down here.
It's got wonderful effects built in.
It has got an incredible phaser built in,
the same phaser that is
used all throughout Logic.
Also a wow-wow pedal,
a classic guitar wow-wow
is built right in.
So let's see.
Let's get that up.
Classic.
And of course that can be automated.
We can create auto-wow patches.
Phenomenal.
I actually like to use the
EVD-6 just to give me a bit
more sort of rhythmic stuff.
For example,
I might come down here and enhance that
piano part that I've just put down.
Okay, so here's my piano part,
I just want to add a little... Just a
little bit of sort of chicken picking.
♪ Love was so good ♪
Stop playing, of course then I'm left
again with an object here,
but this time I could potentially
just loop it over and over
again so it keeps repeating.
I've actually got some
echo on that via Ascend.
The actual EVD 6 is panned
slightly to the left,
and the echo slightly on the right,
just to give me a slight stereo imaging.
So that's the EVD-6,
absolutely phenomenal.
Let's take a look now at, quickly,
at the ES-1.
The ES-1 is one of our
synthesized plug-ins.
This is a single
oscillator synth plug-in.
It actually has a
sub-oscillator right down here.
So there's the classic sawtooth square
wave with pulse width modulation.
We've got the mixer,
which lets us mix between the main
oscillator and the sub-oscillator.
A very simple signal path
goes through a drive,
which can be driven into a filter,
a four-stage filter with a 24 dB slope,
12 dB slope, 18 dB slope.
How many people actually
know what that means?
Mate, could you tell me?
So we even have our classic fat slope,
and usually when you
slope by as much as 24,
you lose a lot of the
bottom end to the sound,
so our fat filter allows us to
reclaim some of that lost bass.
Absolutely...
Amazing, my god, I'm drooling,
can't believe it.
Here's another bass.
Wow, just incredible.
Let's have a listen to
a little lead sound.
And of course,
what a difference if you just
add a little bit of delay.
So that's the ES-1.
Absolutely incredible.
It does have a built-in
ADSR for adjusting your attack,
decay and release.
I'll just quickly show you that.
I'll call up this bass patch.
I can change.
And of course there's a router right
in the middle because we have an LFO,
so we can assign the LFO to
trigger anything from pitch,
pulse width, our cutoff frequency,
our resonance, and we also can affect
the sound via velocity.
So we could, the harder we play,
I could assign that cutoff right there.
So for example, let's try this.
I'll bring back down my envelope.
So now the quieter I play,
that reflects the bottom right here,
which is zero.
We're selecting cutoff.
So this is the range as I play harder,
which will increase the cutoff.
So that's the ES-1.
Let's take a look at this bad boy
because this really is one of the
simplest UI designs I've ever seen.
Where do I begin?
Let me select the track down here.
I've got a simple brass pad,
just a simple sort of 80s.
Music
And if you really listen to the attack,
it really kind of spits a bit.
Now, this is a three oscillator synth.
We've got one, two, three oscillators,
and we've got all of the classic
waveforms that you would normally expect.
The difference on the
second and the third is,
the second and the third,
their waveforms, like the square wave,
can be synced to number one,
so that you can create
that kind of syncing sound.
Just over here to the
right of the oscillators,
we have a triangular mixer,
which allows us to mix between
the three different oscillators.
On the left-hand side of that,
we have the tonal control, like so.
Let me just call up a
default patch for a second.
Maybe I can just borrow
Manfred for one second.
Can you just come over and play
this for me while I tweak and show
what can only be considered the
most wonderful crowd ever at WWDC?
I just want to quickly show them here,
for example.
So if I stick that right up here,
I'm only hearing oscillator one.
And I can pick a digital sine wave.
any one of a hundred digital sine waves.
But the difference is, with oscillator 1,
I've also got FM right here at the top.
It looks like that.
I can slide that,
it doesn't really do much,
but what that is,
is the FM side of oscillator 1.
It needs to modulate
itself off something else.
So for example, let me show you this.
So if I go to oscillator 2,
let me just turn oscillator 1 off.
Oh, let me do that again.
Look at that.
Wow.
Oh, that's fantastic, that is.
Let me just try it on that one, Dad.
Okay, so what I'm going to do is just
pick a digital waveform down here.
Can you play it for a second?
So I'll just choose pulse 5.
Now what I'm going to do is I'm going
to put that back over here to 1.
Now when I slide it,
it will modulate the FM on
that second oscillator.
"That's the nature of that classic sound.
And then it's going to come through
here to a dual filter that can either
be put into series or parallel.
So for example, this is in series,
that's in parallel.
Can I do that again dad?
Look at that, that's fantastic.
We have a blend mode that lets
us blend between the two filters.
And we have low, high,
Peak, Band Reject and Band Pass,
and also the classic 12, 16, slopes,
as well as resonance.
We can mix between the two.
Over here,
we come to the distortion section
that allows us to add distortion.
either dark or bright.
And we've got a chorus
flange and a phaser.
Now,
the thing about most analog synthesizers
is they are indeed... Where you going?
I'm finished yet mate, I'm telling you!
Come on!
The thing about most analog synthesizers
is that they're very analog,
and they do analog inherent things,
like for example,
when you used to switch them on,
they would sort of, the oscillators would
go in and out of tune.
So, we have this analog thing here
which reproduces that kind of feel,
so yeah, just...
sends it a little bit out of tune,
just again to give it
that analog fatness.
Then the other nice thing about
analog synthesizers is it used
to let you play in unison,
didn't it?
Remember Unison?
Yeah, she was a really nice girl.
We can come over here
and switch Unison on,
which essentially doubles the notes,
so now give us... And of course you're
hearing this with absolutely no effects.
Thank you, mate.
Round of applause for Manfred.
He's German!
He's come over from Germany.
He's been staying with me for a week,
and I haven't shown him anywhere.
I'm showing him a damn thing.
I've been sat in the
house working on my demo.
So that's the ES2.
A couple of other things about the ES2.
It has an extensive modulation matrix
right here in the center section,
which allows you to route any parameter
to any knob or slider on your keyboard.
It has also got three LFOs.
One is a polyphonic LFO,
one is a monophonic LFO,
and then we have three envelopes,
a single one there.
We have one that can be
used for the filter section,
and one over here that can be
used for the actual amplitude.
So for example, I could take that,
bring down the filter,
come down here in the modulation matrix,
and you can see here that cutoff 1 and 2,
which is fine, cutoff 1 and 2,
is being affected by envelope 2.
So for example,
if I want to do a modulation,
I can do a modulation,
and then I can do a modulation.
So for example, if I bring this up,
the attack of envelope 2.
opens up that filter as it builds along.
So I want to put down
a simple brass part,
let's do that.
I'm going to come up here and select my
brass again and let's just put it down.
So I'm going to take off my automation.
There we go.
Make sure, just come up an octave,
there we go, up the volume.
All I'm using here is just a
standard keyboard controller,
nothing fancy,
nothing really that expensive.
They come in all sorts of
sizes and models and weighted
keys and non-weighted keys.
You can also use the ES2 for
some beautiful things like pads,
I mean,
and we can open up the filter just
by bringing up the modulation wheel.
Of course we can then bring up the volume
simply by taking the automation off.
So that's the ES-2,
absolutely capable of producing
some earth-shaking basses,
rich, warm, analog sounds.
I want to come back now to one particular
instrument which I wanted to do first
but I actually left till last because
I want to record some drums with this.
And this is the EXS24.
This is the sampler, built-in sampler.
It is one of the most
popular samplers of all time.
One of the reasons it's so
popular... Do you need a pillow?
You sure?
Okay.
I've got one for you.
What's nice about it is that it
can load up sample libraries,
not just made specifically for the EXS.
This can load up sound fonts
if you happen to have a PC,
and you've got sound fonts that
you want to load up into the EXS24,
that's not a problem.
That will convert your sound fonts.
If you have an old boat anchor
of an Akai sampler in a rack,
you know, one of those big heavy things,
or even more so a Kurzweil,
then you can simply take all of your
Akai CDs that you have purchased
over the years and convert those.
The other nice thing too,
is anyone familiar with Giga Sampler?
[Transcript missing]
I can't play that, can I?
Now, the thing about this piano is it
uses a different set of samples
for when the sustain pedal is up.
What happened there?
Something's... Let's try that again.
And it has a completely
different set of samples for
when I step back down on the...
So what you actually hear is the
sound body of the piano resonating.
I'll give you for example,
it has another set of
samples which change when we
actually let go of the keys.
One set of samples,
second set of samples.
Now it doesn't sound like...
Why would you put a second
set of samples on the release?
Well you might put it on for this reason.
For example,
when you let go of the keys of a piano,
the body of the piano resonates.
So if I take the release samples and for
example I just bring them down in volume,
it will essentially give this
piano a sort of dead sound.
"No reverb, no reverb.
Ok, so... Now listen to what happens
when I whack that up to +12.
Just to accentuate it a little bit.
It sounds exactly the same."
A little bit different.
You can hear that natural reverberation.
And that's the performance
factor of the EXS24.
The other nice thing about the EXS24,
let's go back here,
is for example on this string sound here,
the modulation wheel is
changing the samples from,
say, a sort of legato sound like this.
And when I pull it
back down to the front,
more staccato.
So, beautiful, and that's,
same thing can be said for
what we call key switching.
For example,
here's a violin that uses key switching.
So for example,
There's a note.
Now,
when I hit certain notes at the bottom,
it doesn't actually play anything.
It just serves to switch the sample.
So, for example, if I hit C1, I have a...
When I hit C sharp, it gives me staccato.
And when I hit D...
Just like the cartoons running around.
And we can go back.
We also have tremolo.
And trills.
Wow, I feel so animated.
So as you can see, as a performance tool,
it allows you to perform with
much... Thank you very much.
allows you to perform with much
more flexibility and expression.
Now, the EXS obviously does much
more than just strings,
and much more than just pianos.
It will also allow me to do drums.
Here,
I have an EXS loaded up with some drums.
So if I want to record some drums,
I can close my plug-in window.
I'm going to move over
here to my introduction.
Just here.
I'm going to mute this
piano for a second.
There we go.
And so,
what I want to do is I want to record
some drums over and over again,
so I'm going to check
my recording options.
Auto create track in the cycle mode,
which is good.
So... Just allows me,
if I make a mistake, I can start again.
I'm going to shorten that by four bars.
There we go.
Select a track below it.
You can drop out of record,
and I can solo.
Just those objects.
Now those objects have
been quantized on the way,
and that means, okay,
you set Logic by clicking here and
coming up to the playback parameters,
and you can see that we
have 16 swing enabled.
So basically Logic's saying, okay,
got a real hack playing the keyboard,
he's playing stuff in out of time,
I just need to correct it all
for him so he sounds good.
And that's exactly what it's
done on those three objects.
I can take that off and you can
hear it in its original glory.
And that's the nice thing about Logic,
because everything about
Logic is non-destructive.
It doesn't matter if you
quantize stuff on the way in,
or you do it after the fact.
It will always preserve
your original performance.
So, again, that can be 16ths.
We could swing it a little bit.
And I'll just put that back down to 16B.
Now once that object has been recorded,
we can do a number of
different things with it.
Of course it stops right here at bar 20.
Now maybe I want that to
repeat over and over again.
For example, this is my kick,
which I can name as my kick.
This one down here I'm
soloing right now is my hat,
and right here is my snare drum.
If I want those to repeat
over and over again,
I can just simply loop them like so,
and they will repeat to the
end of the song or until
they run into another object.
Okay, now I also have another EXS with
a different snare drum on it.
So I can simply move these things around.
I can say, okay,
let's drop this to this track,
which is just another channel
with the same instrument on it,
but this time it's got a
compressor and an EQ on it,
and some reverb.
So for example, so...
Okay?
And that is going to bus 8,
and I do want to check something
on my track mixer here.
Global.
Well I've got nothing going to bus eight,
so let's just do that.
So let me show you how I would do that.
I'm going to come here,
I'm going to say input bus eight,
there we go.
I'm going to bring up a
mono to stereo reverb,
space designer.
I'm going to call up,
let's call up this patch right here,
vocal, let's just use vocal plate, small,
there we go.
And make sure that the, that's on max.
So now this channel receives bus eight,
goes out of output one and two,
so now that should give me reverb.
Here we go.
So I can come down and I can move my
hi-hat down to another track to give
me a less than electronic hi-hat.
"I'll just move that down to conserve
space and I'll just delete that track,
that track, that track.
So now I've got some drums.
Let's just have a listen."
Logic also deals with audio.
How do I get audio files in
besides just recording them?
Well, let's say I want to deal
with some drum loops.
What I can do is,
I'm going to come over here to
Screen Set 7.
Logic has 99 screen sets,
and don't be confused by screen sets,
they're not that complicated.
They just allow you to
quickly jump from one view,
like this view,
to a view which is a little
bit sort of zoomed in,
to even something that, you know,
maybe has an instrument open.
You have 99 of these,
and they're just recalled
by simply tapping a number.
So I want to bring in an audio loop
so I'm going to go to the finder here,
here's my finder and I'm going to
grab this drum loop right here,
just go back to Logic and I'm going to
come along and just drop it right here,
just there.
And let's take a listen to that.
It's just a four on the floor loop.
And let's bring it up in volume a little.
Let's take a listen with the other drums.
And... They're not really grooving,
because this is a four
on the floor groove,
and the drums I recorded had
very much a syncopated bass drum.
So, for example,
what I'm going to do here is,
I'm just going to take this bass drum...
And because it's looped,
I'm going to turn the loop off just
so you can see what's happening here.
If I grab the right hand side of it,
I can simply hide.
So that's just going to give me one kick.
Now I can make copies of that and say,
OK, well maybe put one there,
and put one there like so.
Or I can simply just loop that one.
And that gives me a four on the floor.
Or I can stretch it out a little bit.
And let's take a listen with these.
So again, four on the floor.
There we go.
Take that solo off and take
a listen with the loop.
Logic also reads Rex files.
Rex files are a similar
type of audio files,
but the difference between these types
of files is Rex files allow you to change
the tempo of your song after the fact.
With this particular loop
that I just put in there,
that loop is a certain tempo.
It just happens to be at 124.
But I could, for instance,
bring in this conga loop right here.
I can drop that there,
and I'm going to say bring
that in without crossfades.
Hit OK.
And it brings in a folder full
of little sliced audio there.
And that will allow me to
change the tempo if I desire.
So again, I'm just going to loop that.
And there's the conga.
I'm going to bring one more loop in.
Okay, this is called Killer Loop.
I'm just going to grab that,
just going to drop that right here,
and this time, again,
I don't want crossfades.
So, now I have another loop
which I will also loop.
My original drum loop,
which is an audio file,
I'll loop that now.
So now my rhythm section
is really coming together.
I want to do some editing to
these parts I've recorded.
For example, the brass stabs.
I want those in the beginning.
Now I don't want to hear
her just make my heart go.
She's just not moving me,
so I'm just going to mute her for now.
I can't be doing with it,
you know what I mean?
I also want to bring in the pad,
so I'm just going to
slide the pad in there.
Don't move the automation.
I'm going to make a copy of the piano.
I'm going to make another
copy of the piano here.
I don't want the clavinet to start,
so I'm going to move that to here.
There is a little tag line on this piano,
two bars that I want to add,
so I'm just going to come here,
I'm just going to use the
marquee tool and clip that out.
In fact,
I don't even need to clip it out,
I can simply highlight it like so,
and then just hold the option key
down and just make a copy like that.
It gives me my little two
bar tag line right here,
then I continue on,
make a copy of that and
just simply loop it.
My arrangement is
starting to come together.
I want to do, what about editing
across multiple tracks?
Well,
let's come back here to the beginning.
So before she comes in with
that "Love was so cool,
I want a little stop." ♪ ♪ Just here.
So again I'm going to
take the marquee tool,
I'm just going to go across
those tracks like so,
and then just delete them like so,
and so that gives me a nice little stop.
You can see that I've also got to stop
right here as I come into my verse.
Right there in the chorus,
this is the chorus,
I'm just going to put the pad again.
So I'm just going to take the
pad and just hold the option
key down and move that to there.
I don't want to copy the automation.
Now what about if I want to
make some edits to audio?
Well that's also quite simple.
I'm just going to come here and
I'm going to find my snare drum,
which is right here,
and bring down that reverb,
it's too much.
So I want to do something with the lead
vocal in my introduction right here.
I've got a little synth introduction.
So I want to do a couple of things.
I want to take the verse,
so I'm going to take
this verse right here,
just going to make a copy of that
right up to the top of the song.
Do you want to copy the automation data?
Yeah, I'll, never, I'll just say never.
So here we go.
It'll build the new fade files.
Love was so good,
could receive the trouble ahead.
And what I'm going to do
is just come over here,
and on this last one,
I'm going to cut this up.
So I'm just going to trim that like,
oops.
Just going to grab the corner of that,
trim that to there.
You can see the fade.
I can take that fade off, like so.
I can add a longer fade, like so.
And I can make a simple copy of that,
like so.
I'll make this copy of the word baby,
just to give me a bit of a composite.
There we go.
Okay, and then the last thing I want
to do here is I want to take
two bars of this phrase here.
I'm going to take that phrase there,
make a copy of that over here,
but this time I'm going to
drop it on the track below.
I'm going to make a
copy of that to there,
copy of that to there.
This time what I'm going to do,
I'm just going to come here,
take out these effects
so you can hear it.
So I want to get rid of that,
so I'm just going to
get rid of it like so.
And again, I'll put a fade, just zoom in,
put a little fade on it like so.
Let this play through,
and then I'll also snip the
end of that off like so.
Now what about effects?
How do we add effects
to things like this?
Well, I'll give you an example here.
Let me go to the verse one second.
Here's the verse.
Let's take a listen to the
lead vocal on its own actually.
Again, I'm using Cycle.
♪ But could we see the trouble ahead
♪ So we have the basic compressor.
You see I've got a compressor right here.
And if we unmute that,
bring the threshold up,
the compressor will just
smooth that vocal out.
"But could we see the trouble ahead?
I wish I could." You can also add EQ.
I've got an analyzer.
"Have I read the thoughts
inside your head?
Did you go crazy?"
A little bit of AM radio there.
You can even put some distortion on it.
And of course, I can have total shelving.
Or a regular vocal.
I'm boosting 200 which
gives it that wood feel.
I love things that got wood.
So that's the EQ,
and then we have Space Design.
I talked about this before.
Space Design is a
convolution reverb that,
via a convolution method,
you can actually take
a reading of a room,
convolve that,
and it will give you an impulse
response file right there in the middle,
which is a representation
of a particular room,
and that room could be something like,
for example, a small vocal plate.
[Transcript missing]
You can even half the sampling
rate to give it twice,
make it twice as long,
but also give it even a
bit more of a warmer feel,
because darker e-boards
have a warmer feel.
[Transcript missing]
It also does many other
things like for example,
I can give myself a stereo spread,
slap back.
Double Imaging And then using Sends I can
add some delay and some more reverb.
Here's another quick example.
On this edit that I made right here
we can use effects to radically
change the sound of something.
So for example,
here I've got my edited vocal.
Okay,
so I'm going to add a spectral gate.
This is a spectral gate.
Listen to this.
That sort of gives me a gate
all the other frequencies in
this particular patch is giving
me a sort of chirping effect.
Um, could also be a tremolo,
which is just giving me a stutter effect.
Add those together.
Let's try that again.
Oh, that one, there we go.
And then I can add a tape delay.
And the nice thing about the tape
delay is if you push the feedback up,
you can send it into distortion.
And that's nice because now I can
give myself some creative control.
I can come to the top of the song.
Here it is.
We can see the edit
that we made just here.
There it is.
I'll just zoom in a little bit.
I'll make sure that the
track is in touch mode.
And what I want to do is use that
feedback to fill the gaps between here.
So we'll do it like this.
"You know what I'm going to do is just,
yeah, you'll hear it, it doesn't matter.
Here we go."
You can see that just
records those movements.
Thank you very much indeed.
And of course I can then go
into any of these and just make
breakpoint movements like so.
I can take any sort of tool
and make curves or S-shapes.
I can paint a really nice
little picture there,
if I really want.
And then, usually,
throughout this actual demonstration
I've been sort of showing you,
you know, obviously the same editing
applies to MIDI and audio.
But for example,
I had switched off the automation of
certain instruments like the piano,
and I can come back and
put that into read mode,
because read allows it to read the
automation that we've put down there.
So sometimes,
within the context of a mix,
when we solo it,
it's a little bit on the quiet side.
But let's just take a listen.
the volume up with that.
Now there is no bass on this so
what I'm going to do is I'm just
going to finish this up by record
enabling this track right here.
We'll just make it large
so that we can see it.
We'll go to the top of the song and
make sure that my bass is working.
I've got my monitor right here.
In the real world this
is exactly how it works.
We've got an actual instrument,
my electric bass guitar.
As I said before I'm
not really a musician,
I'm just a drummer so bear with me.
I'm just going to back up here
to my intro and hit record.
Just to show you it's working.
Wait for it to come
around and here we go.
That's it basically,
that's the gist of it,
you know what I mean?
And so, just to quickly come back,
it will rebuild the waveform,
and then right here in the solo,
let's see...
I actually made a mistake.
I should have gone...
I can just cut that out.
Let's drop it out of record, there we go.
And we'll just split that, one click,
gets rid of that region.
Come over here, we'll just highlight
We're going to highlight that
two bar section right there,
make a copy of that, stick it there,
make an adjustment to the end,
and we've fixed it.
And of course it's extremely hard for
you to hear in this particular room,
but I think you get the idea.